Meditators speak of sensations and thoughts appearing in consciousness. What's more, they argue that every information we have access to is just an appearance in consciousness. Those insights are compatible with the Lamme's theoretical framework which decouples attention and awareness.

In a similar way in which gaze movements stabilize the orientation of the image being projected onto the retina, the pupil light response stabilizes the brightness of the image. The pupil light response is merely tasked with acting as a buffer, maintaining isoluminance for a short period, while the eye-level chemical adaptations kick in.

Digital twins are digital reconstructions of physical belongings, people, buildings, and other. Although this idea partially overlaps with conversational interfaces around knowledge, it's more focused on simplified representations of physical properties and behavior.

Statements about an objective reality reflect inner beliefs as much as they reflect empirical observations. This is caused by the top-down lens through which people perceive the world, and its inevitable anthropocentric influence. If all you have is a computational paradigm, everything you see looks like an information-processing machine. However, if everything you see looks like an information-processing machine, you might have internalized a belief about the generality of computation. This connection can provide a way of tapping into inner belief structures in some forms of psychotherapy, together with other techniques.

Active cognitive probing techniques may be based on surveys. Passive cognitive probing techniques may be based on content generated by the person. Active behavioral probing techniques may be based on measuring the reaction of the person in response to a claim. Passive behavioral probing techniques may be based on observing the behavior of the person in the world, without intervention, and contemplating the belief system which could cause it.

If a person is told that their actions are simply an effect of their neurobiology, discarding their notion of free will, then that person becomes more irresponsible. The very belief that their free will is inconsequential is influencing their behavior for the worse. This situation manifests itself indirectly in the self-model of consciousness. Viktor Frankl refers to this situation in what he calls pan-determinism.

If what you learn about the world reinforces your prior beliefs, you're going to experience dopamine-driven reward. If what you learn about the world contradicts your prior beliefs, you're going to experience anxiety. One's beliefs, through their interaction with the world, influence the body's very biochemistry through the secretion of neurotransmitters, hormones, and other substances. Ignoring the philosophical elephant in the room that is the mind-body problem, this connection can provide a framework for how memetic interactions driven by one's ideological mark-up can have an influence on their actual body, nudging the body into possibly helpful physiological states.

If one is tasked with coming up with many exemplars of a concept, then they will typically start with the most representative ones, and then slowly exhaust their way around the conceptual periphery of that concept. This progressive increase in difficulty in coming up with exemplars can make challenging tasks more accessible (e.g. coming up with many alternative representations in fine arts, reaching back to many old friends).

The tradition of symbolic AI attempted to formalize intelligence as symbol manipulation. On the other hand, connectionist AI attempted to do that through neural networks, using no explicit symbols. Empiricism, as opposed to nativism, argues that a mind has no prior knowledge about the world prior to observing it, it's tabula rasa. Deep learning can be viewed as empiricism because models are trained on data from an environment. Backpropagation appears to be biologically implausible, yet is very effective in deep learning. Humans need far fewer samples to learn from compared to deep learning models. Adversarial attacks against deep learning models appear similar to optical illusions for humans. Deep learning models inherit bias from data, which has some intriguing implications for the empiricism analogy. Philosophical normativity might be able to provide moral guidelines for building AI. DNNs are compatible with a mechanistic view on cognition.

The level of arousal influences functional brain connectivity. This influence leads to changes in the dynamics of thought. A sleepy and drowsy person is considered to have a less rigid, more fluid, and less constrained pattern of thought. Conversely, a stressed fearful person is considered to have a rigid, accurate, convential cognitive dynamic. In the context of the neural manifold hypothesis, this suggests that metabolic influences alter the manifold structure and vector field. Additionally, this means that one can intentionally modify their current neural dynamics using voluntary controls of arousal (e.g. through breathwork or optic flow).

Even if the retinal image is flipped relative to the world outside the eye, the brain has no trouble in perceiving the world. The fact that the brain seamlessly interprets the idiosyncratic retinal image highlights its ability to mine for patterns. Retinal projection contains a clear mapping to the world, although initially non-trivial.

If in the context of a study, you perform experience sampling very often, you obtain a high accuracy, yet the hassle of reporting also results in attrition for the participants. However, if you relax sampling to reduce attrition, you face a decrease in accuracy. A balance has to be struck.

Statistical models of users, in the more advanced sense, can be used to inform decisions about marketing campaigns. By testing many marketing strategies against high-fidelity user models, people can engineer highly-effective marketing campaigns on the real users. Unfortunately, publishing one's thoughts might lead to better such user models.

Paraphrase mining is the machine learning task of finding sentences which significantly overlap in meaning. In the context of the second brain architecture, paraphrase mining might be able to connect sentences of a note with titles of other notes, enabling understanding through explicit position cues.

If one plans on using AI-informed tools for thought in note-taking, one will inevitably face the current limitations of language models. For instance, the fluid search is not perfect and requires a human-in-the-loop. However, this constraint enforced by the use of machine learning models can be seen as an advantage. If language models work best when phrasing is clear and concise, then this might provide an incentive for the note-taker to take high-quality notes.

A machine learning model can spontaneously reach a region of the optimization space where its performance as judged by the optimization function is superb, yet its behavior with respect to its creator's intentions is deplorable. For instance, an agent in a simulated physical environment may learn to exploit a bug of the physics engine, scoring high with a meaningless strategy, because it hijacked its own reward system. Similarly, addicted individuals, together with their internal reward systems, are learning to optimize for innate drives, but don't end up manifesting meaningful behavior. Addiction arguably leads to a counterproductive behavior for the individual and society, even if performance on the dopamine optimization function is superb.

Assuming one deeply internalized the belief that the future can be predicted, one's free will becomes trivial to disable. The ability to tap into the future may be supported by a fabricated notion of photons traveling backwards, such as in Egan's short novel "The Hundred-Light-Year Diary". Moreover, if the future can be predicted in such an intimate way as through a personal diary, guiding action becomes trivial, especially with an ideological scaffolding structure patching out the inconsistencies about spacetime.

In contrast with a deeply artificial background or environment, a somewhat natural robot or virtual agent may appear life-like and natural. Context-dependent effects, such as those found in color perception, plausibly exist in the perception of naturalness and human nature. This effect might be able to rescue robots from the uncanny valley.

When a tutoring system has access to a learner's knowledge base, it can orchestrate concept learning so as to best build on previous knowledge. Learner-aware concept learning is the process of building on previous conceptual structures in the most efficient way possible, just as an structural engineer keeps track of loads and physical support. In this context, tools for thought might help the user optimize for short semantic distances. Additionally, it could automatically come up with explicit position cues and mental models based on prior knowledge. When new knowledge is also well-structured as a knowledge base, additional graph-theoretic heuristics might guide the optimal path forward.

Levels of perceived light have been shown to inform the circadian rhythm. It seems that compounds secreted in the eye in response to light are responsible for this. Blue light appears to particularly drive chemical adaptation in the eye.

People are capable of adjusting their baseline reference point of pain and pleasure based on experience. This means that through long enough exposure to a pleasant or painful stimuli, one is going to eventually perceive it as perfectly ordinary. The notion of hedonic adaptation empowers individuals going through difficult situations.

To grasp the red apple, a robot needs to: identify the object, come up with a motor plan, and execute it. Information concerning both spatial attention and movement intention can be found in the PPC (posterior parietal cortex). Spatial attention is the way we orient our attention to a specific location in space. Spatial attention can be moved independently of any effector (e.g. hand or eyes). Movement intentions are movement plans directed to a location in space that are specific for each effector. Spatial attention consists of orienting our attention to the object location, and it's independent from the effector. Conversely, movement intention consists of planning to move to the object location, and it's specific to the effector. The Posner paradigm investigates attentional capture for spatial attention without effector movement. In the saccade task, a monkey has to memorize the flash location, and later move its eyes to that location. In the reaching task, a monkey has to memorize the flash location, and later move the hand to the target location. By comparison the saccade and reach task, we get different motor intentions, but similar same spatial attention. If PPC reflects movement intentions, we expect different activity during the two tasks, because they're effector-specific. Activity in the LIP area (Lateral Intraparietal) differs between the saccade and reach trials, with higher activity for saccade trials. LIP codes for saccade motor plans. In contrast, PRR (Parietal Reach Region) shows higher activity during reach trials, so it might code for reaching plans. Spatial attention and movement intentions can be experimentally separated in the memory task. There are separate areas in the PPC that code the specific motor plan, with LIP for saccade and PRR for reaching.

People from many cultures associate points with places and lines with connections, among others. There appears to be a systematicity to visual vocabulary across cultures, which highlights the connection between descriptive and depictive representations.

It's difficult for someone to draw a perfect circle without assistance. However, movement supports reasoning and drawing surfaces extend working memory, so it would be useful to reduce this friction. In light of this, heuristics or data-driven modeling could be used to detect strokes which resemble predefined shapes (e.g. circle, square, car), and autocorrect them.

Emergent properties of a system can often be seen as approximate macrolevel descriptions of the low level. In this view, emerging symbolic representations in a neural network would be closely linked to the resonant dynamics of the network itself. In inclusive emergence, symbolic representations derived from distributed neural activity can't be properly tackled independently, contrary to what has been tried with syntax trees, for instance. A good parallel for inclusive emergence in cognition is genetic coding. In genetic coding, DNA structures do code for specific aminoacids, but only in the context of a complex distributed metabolic system which resides in the background of such symbols.

In his short story title "Closer", Greg Egan explores how two individuals can perfectly share their momentary experiences. Their neural manifolds are modified to meet half-way through in the latent space of latent spaces (i.e. the meta manifold of different possible neural manifolds).

When everybody is focusing on the same external stimuli, they are less aware of each other. That is why the movie theater is associated with privacy. However, the reason for this is that sharing a common focus limits attendance of personal information.

Many argue that generalist individuals with broad knowledge, rather than specialists with deep knowledge, are more likely to yield breakthroughs. However, this is likely caused by a repeated and sustained scaffolding process driven by rich conceptual cues, rather than lucky obscure paradigms intersecting by chance, isolated glimpses into other conceptual silo's. Multiple perspectives are essential in avoiding blindspots. Therefore, a rich mental model repository is conductive of insight.

The huge diversity of logics, including modal logic, default logic, or tense logic, provide formal conceptual frameworks for describing, evaluating, and managing truth. Through domain-specific operators such as time-related ones, logics provide tools for reasoning about truth in certain complex situations.

This metaphor combines aspects of the brain-piano metaphor with aspects of the brain-stadium metaphor. The brain-orchestra metaphor links neural activity to the symphony produced by an orchestra. Its performance is mostly based on music notes, similar to neural spikes, yet the wide variety of instruments involved highlights the diversity of neuron cells. As in the brain-stadium metaphor, the brain-orchestra metaphor also provides some intuition for neuroimaging from outside the music hall up to an individual instrument.

Static interventions seem to decrease in effectiveness over time. In contrast, rotating interventions seem to be much more effective. However, they also increase attrition, meaning that users are more likely to opt out entirely.

The brain-train metaphor is a double metaphor. On the one hand, it relates the trajectory of neural activity with a passenger boarding a specific train of thought, similar to the brain-sled metaphor. On the other hand, it relates the brain structure with the rigid railway infrastructure which supports traveling. The brain-train metaphor highlights the rigid nature of brain structure, while also hinting at the possibility of switching patterns of thought by switching trains. It's important to note that the brain-train metaphor doesn't invoke structural neural pathways, but rather abstract high-dimensional connectivity which supports the aggregate functional dynamic.

Just like paraphrase mining approximates dense linking and, in turn, fosters understanding, natural language inference provides the tools necessary for deriving explicit position cues in conceptual space, the underlying mental models. Specifically, based on prompt engineering, machine learning models can infer whether or not a certain text provides supporting evidence, a formal framework, an example, or something else. Those relations could also just be presented to the second brain practitioner, who in term could make use of them.

Unsupervised learning is a misnomer, because often labels are derived from the data itself. Performing self-supervised learning using a huge amount of data might be one of the few feasible methods of endowing an artificial agent with robust commonsense. The reasoning is that human performance and few-shot learning is possible only with the epistemological background of commonsense acquired during development.

More often than not, a machine learning model is tasked with approximating a mapping based on the entirety of the available data. In contrast, people first learn in steps, gradually, progressive. They don't attempt to write eloquent English before learning to connect high-frequency words. However, the key to developing commonsense might be to incrementally constructively anchor new concepts on previously internalized ones.

The rough mechanic processing of visual stimuli through eye movement is analogous to the rather primitive techniques of data preprocessing in machine learning. Both eye movement in visual perception and data preprocessing in computer vision are ways of increasing the signal to noise ratio of the stimuli.

In videography, B-rolls are short stock clips which are inserted during narration. Besides making narration more dynamic through different movements than the person talking, B-rolls can also diffuse the viewer's attention, making them go back and forth between a focused and a diffused mental state.

When tasked with summarizing a piece of information, you have to actively determine what the most important aspects are, and how they relate to each other. What's more, abstractive summarization is much more effective in forcing understanding compared to extractive summarization, as highlighted by the optimization argument for the Feynman technique.

In experimental psychology, guidelines for focusing on responding quickly usually result in lower accuracy. Conversely, guidelines for focusing on high accuracy usually result in increased response times. There is a trade-off between speed and accuracy when working with behavior. In light of this, mechanisms which automatically increase accuracy (e.g. autocorrect) allow the user to be sloppier, and therefore faster.

In 3D modeling, modifiers constitute distinct transformations which can be composed into extensive sequences. This modularity enables the designer to mix and match modifiers like nested operators, tapping into an expressive logic of 3D transformations.

People subconsciously attribute beneficial psychological attributes to a person who looks good. Essentially, physical appearance modules people's perception of one's psychological attributes.

Not only is a medium a channel for information to propagate through. Printing, writing, radio, TV, and other major media for information brought about significant changes in the messages being exchanged. Media aren't static support structures for unrelated messages, they mutually inform each other.

Spatial reasoning forces the individual to abstract away from features perceived through individual modalities, such as brightness and loudness, and derive an independent spatial representation. Due to this, spatial reasoning is conceptually located at the confluence of all the bodily senses.

While objectivism argues the there is such a thing as absolute truth (consonant with empiricism and realism), and subjectivism argues that truth is only a matter of personal interpretation (consonant with romanticism and idealism), Lakoff and Johnson suggest a third approach. Experientialism argues that there can be a shared agreed-upon truth which provides enough grounding for functional development and interaction, but which is itself based on one's embodiment and cultural embedding. Lakoff and Johnson argue that truth is as much the product of an outer world as it is one of an inner experiential world, without falling into either one of these two extremes. In this view, the subjectivism-objectivism dichotomy appears to be nothing more than a counterproductive meme.

provides a framework for cognitive augmentation. Therefore, one's time investment in the development of a second brain can be seen as an active measure for mitigating cognitive decline. Many cognitive functions decline with age, yet the computational capabilities of the second brain (e.g. fluid search) increase through the years, making it possible for cognitive functions (e.g. working memory) to be compensated exosomatically.

Individuals are more than a list of attributes encoded in their genome. Changes in a phenotypic trait are most often associated with a coordinated non-linear change in multiple genes. It is rare that one isolated gene codes for a specific trait.

Conflicting beliefs trigger cognitive dissonance, a deeply-rooted unpleasant feeling. The consuming conflict can spark anxiety, which manifests vividly from the cognitive to the behavioral domain. Therefore, the spontaneous anxious response can be seen as a sparse signal into one's ideological structures. This signal can inform a number of cognitive-based psychotherapies.

In the spirit of constructivism, one should strive for finding connections between newly acquired knowledge and previous knowledge through the closest semantic distances. By focusing on leveraging the highest semantic similarities, one is optimally internalizing new knowledge by using existing knowledge as a scaffolding structure. An application of this rationale is fluid search.

Given the well-documented interaction between perception and mental imagery, sensory deprivation might improve AI-informed reconstruction of mental imagery. This would be due to a marked increase in the signal-to-noise ratio, as the interference of external stimuli is reduced.

You attempt to convince people that you can forecast highly unpredictible binary events, like quantum states or outcomes in sports. If you forecast one outcome for half of the targets and the one for the other half, you'll inevitably be correct in half of the cases. Repeat that for a linear increase in the streak size but an exponential decrease in the convinced targets. Unlucky targets, unknowing of the scale of bruteforcing, might internalize a belief about some remarkable foresight ability of the process. However, anthropic reasoning can help targets work their way out of the trap.

One typically associates themselves with their bodies, although this reflects self-based meaning making. Given that one's body has boundaries, has a begining and an end, a way of rationalizing death is by highlighting how a body is also bound by time. The connection between the casualty of spatial boundaries would make the teporal boundaries less intimidating.

The traditional spaced repetition paradigm treats items or flashcards as independent units which have to be approached and learned individually. However, the human mind arguably contains no clear-cut distinctions between such items and deeply integrates them in an interconnected web of knowledge. Therefore, spaced repetition systems could integrate notions of semantic relatedness between the items being learned, leading to a new paradigm of sense repetition.

In 3D modeling, particle systems repeatedly instantiate an object and treat each instance in a slightly different way. The particles being generated belong to the same family, yet are uniquely modified across a small subset of attribute dimensions. Those variable attributes alone can describe the particle system.

In cognitive modeling, researchers suggest cognitive architectures which formalize the connection between the function of cognition and the structure of the brain. High-level cognitive architectures (i.e. closer to ACT-R rather than Nengo), typically consist of modules associated with cognitive functions (e.g. declarative memory, vision) which are related to brain regions (e.g. PFC, visual cortex). However, the second brain configuration resembles a general cognitive architecture. It consists of various modules (e.g. long-term memory, working memory, and short-term memory). What's more the second brain architecture closely resembles human cognitive architecture.

One might assume that the drive for reducing cognitive dissonance is strong and innate. Just like the body's very wiring for preventing physical pain, the brain might prove very resourceful in reducing cognitive dissonance. However, the mind and brain have an influence over the body proper. That said, it's plausible to assume that a belief of good health might actually have a say in one's good health due to the body being wired to make our worldview coherent. If incoherence between world and worldview is painful, and if the brain can modulate (a part of) the world (i.e. the body proper), then it might do it to some extent.

Improvements in fundamental human capabilities readily reverberate across the entirety of human capability. In light of this, Douglas Engelbart advocated that the development of tools for thought should focus on the basics. How can the basic human skills be amplified, optimized, and augmented? This view is also consonant with the second brain framework for cognitive augmentation, as it enables the engineer to focus on independent fundamental functions.

The von Neumann architecture marks a clear distinction between memory and computation. This, however, leads to the von Neumann bottleneck, because information has to continuously be brought back and forth between memory components and computational compontents. In contrast, neural networks merge memory and computation by design. Their parameters house predefined representations, yet inference enables then to support computation. What's more, this also applies to the brain.

If a knowledge base is based on textual representation of knowledge, then natural language processing can render it into an agent. By providing a conversational interface to the knowledge base, natural language processing can be used to "put a face on" arbitrary collections of text, such as working notes, books of an author, or news reports. This notion interacts with the second brain architecture and highlights the possibility of interfacing with with the second brain through dialogue.

Our innate drives for food, sex, and power are readily satisfied through offerings which are far from being aligned with the evolutionary advantages beyond those drives. In this, human ingenuity underscores evolutionary drives, and seems to be counterproductive in an evolution driven by adaptation.

Whiteboards and other drawing surfaces provide a mechanism for offloading working memory load, essentially enhancing the capacity of the speculated visuospatial sketchpad. This might explain why sketching papers are so deeply associated with generating insight. Beyond the two-dimensional drawing surface, virtual reality has the potential of (literally) adding a whole new dimension to this. What's more, fluid search output might also extend working memory, but using the second brain architecture, rather than a drawing surface.

Cognitive realism argues that a large part of cognition is about forming and manipulating coherent representations of the "outside" world in an attempt to best navigate it. Conversely, idealism argues that it is only our representations that we have access to, so they must be our only reference points. In the extreme, idealism holds that even the notion of an "outside" world is an internal representation.

The second brain architecture closely resembles modern human cognitive architectures. For instance, fluid search output resembles working memory, non-linear contents resemble long-term memory, and a transient buffer resembles short-term memory. This high-fidelity alignment can enable a functional dialogue through guidelines for cognitive augmentation. What's more, this close resemblence might have not been a mere coincidence, but the aggregate result of tweaking a note-taking setup in subtle intuitive ways to better fit human cognition.

Smooth pursuit and saccades exapt parts of optokinetic nystagmus, a gaze stabilization reflex. Smooth persuit is a cognitively modulated version of the slow phase of optokinetic nystagmus. In contrast, saccades are a top-down influenced version of the fast phase.

In a Feynman cluster, free learners from widely different disciplines can come together and teach each other about key insights, nuggets, and findings they encountered recently. Due to the widely different backgrounds involved in a Feynman cluster, teaching is similar to practicing the Feynman technique, but in a more social context. The Feynman cluster gives rise positive-sum situation between learners and teachers, because they both have something to gain: new knowledge and better understanding, respectively. Besides enabling the positive-sum loop, social structure can also make the Feynman technique more enjoyable and accountable.

Because restoring a lost ability feels more reasonable than adding a qualitatively different ability to a person's mind, cognitive decline provides a motivating context for cognitive enhancement across a wide range of cognitive domains. From memory to perception, cognitive decline is based on the loss of something which was previously there, by definition, so it provides ample moral opportunity for developing means of cognitive augmentation.

Piotr Wozniak argues that good learning is inherently pleasurable. He argues that people have an innate drive for learning, innately associated with reward systems. This is consonant with the view of the human as an infovore, wired from birth to accumulate knowledge.

Jackendoff argues that awareness is losely connected to an objective world in that it is informed by it. However, he argues that awareness is also only losely connected to a subjective world of thought, in that we're often not aware of our thought process, or at least part of it. In doing so, Jackendoff creates a somewhat enactive alternative approach to the subject-object dichotomy.

Based on load, the brain predictibly recruits otherwise unrelated regions in certain cognitive tasks, a phenomenon also known as compensatory scaffolding. When processing load resumes to manageable levels, the spontaneous increase of allocated resources reverts. This resembles variable allocation of computational resources in web apps with unpredictible user traffic, such as in cloud services. However, just like for a string, there's still a strong upper limit approached asymptotically.

Cartesian anxiety refers to the incessant human craving for an absolute ground, an absolute reference point with respect to which they can predictably operate. This search for an objective "outside" world is reflected in the ideal of mind as a mirror of nature. Through cognitive dissonance, Cartesian anxiety discourages one from considering any belief structure which is at odds with objectivism and the sense of the world as an absolute ground.

Boids are a surpisingly simple, yet effective, computational model of crowd movement. By guiding individual movements of agents through a linear combination of several "drives", boids achieve crowd-like movement. The rules which guide boids are: separation (avoid crowded neighborhoods), alignment (align with nearby agents), and cohesion (aim for the centroid).

The development of commonsense can be viewed as the creation and polishing of causal models about the world. Causal models enable an intuitive understanding of many different domains of one's life. For instance, intuitive physics provides us with basic understanding about physical objects, movement, forces, and so on. Intuitive sociology gives us a basic sense of groups, families, collectives, us and them. Intuitive morality gives us a basic understanding of good and bad, likely formed through associations with physical experience, namely pain and pleasure. approaches to mitigating that.

Limbic friction is a concept introduced by Andrew Huberman which refers to the routine conflict between low-level instinctive drives manifested in subcortical areas and high-level cognitive drives manifested in the neocortex. This contrast is made vivid in the brain as monkey and supercomputer metaphor. Even though this notion unquestioningly subscribes to the anatomical dichotomy of cortical/subcortical being superimposed on cognitive function, it successfully highlights the demanding conflict between goals at those different levels. Moreover, it seems like systematically rewarding top-down effort helps develop endurance to limbic friction.

Even if context provides important feedback signals, dictionaries might also be useful candidates for concept learning. In essence, if a machine learning model is trained to predict the word embedding from its definitions, it could then be used to locate new concepts in semantic space based on their definitions. This way, dictionary definitions enable one-shot concept learning in both humans and machines.

The two conflicting movements which characterize the pupil are guided by different nervous systems. Pupil dilation is associated with high arousal, and is directed by the sympathetic nervous system. In contrast, pupil constriction is associated with low arousal, and is directed by the parasympathetic nervous system. Those movements, and likely the larger networks which contain them, are antagonistic.

There's more to an interface than a physical boundary between two agents interacting. A space can also act as an interface between an agent and a community (e.g. stadium), between an agent and a behavior (e.g. kitchen), or between an agent and a thought (e.g. library). Architecture expands interaction beyond the narrow view of human-computer interaction.

Contrary to strong views of cognitive realism, perception across a wide range of modalities seems to be tightly linked to the experiential context. Sound influences vision perception. Color guides perception of shapes. Top-down memory provides a lens through which we view the world. Perception doesn't seem to be a process of recovering physical properties of the environment, but rather a complex experiential emergence.

The perception of movement through space can decrease the level of bodily stress one experiences. If autonomic arousal was evolutionarily engineered to "get us moving", then it only make sense for movement to bring stress levels down, essentially signaling that stress was already effective. Therapeutic practices like EMDR exploit this optic flow destressor by asking participants to incessantly move their eyes horizontally, left to right, while working through a traumatic event, for instance. EMDR exapts the optic flow destressing mechanism.

The grandmother cell hypothesis argues that there are cortical neurons which selectively code single specific concepts, such as one's grandmother. Those gnostic neurons seem to code abstract concepts all by themselves, and respond robustly to variations of that same concept. The grandmother cell hypothesis is a perspective of extreme sparsity, compared to views of more interconnected and distributed representations.

Cognitive magnification takes place across all modalities. The somatosensory "homonculus" is highly distorted, leading to a non-linear representation of the body. The retinotopic organization of the early visual cortex regions distorts the representation of the visual field. This is also reflected in the systematically distorted drawings of childredn around the world. However, the conscious awareness of this distortion is limited. Still, this non-linearity can be an innate mechanism enabling intricate non-linear manifold structures to be derived in neural space.

Just like memory consolidation helps persist short-term memory contents to long-term memory, so does persisting notes consist of turning transient notes into more coherent entries. This adds up to the other second brain-human parallels.

Constructivism in education refers to the focus on building on prior knowledge when learning new things. Given the fact that concept learning is based on few-shot scaffolding, it's easy to see how constructivism can be an essential tool in fostering understanding. The main reason why backlinks are useful is that they essentially signal "many concepts build on this!" There is no one Dockerfile which describes the unique set of rules necessary to internalize a certain concept.

Scarcity makes things appear more valuable than they would in abundance. This tendency can be applied in the context of practicing gratitude. By making the scarcity of individual experiences more salient, one can perceive them as more valuable, and in turn cultivate gratitude towards them.

Older adults appear to use sparser, more distributed networks for the same tasks as their younger counterparts. This suggests that the elder brain attempts to compensate more for cognitive decline by recruiting additional brain regions in its activity. Specifically, they often seem to recruit frontal regions for otherwise "occipital" tasks, plausibly due to increased difficulty of perceiving sensations from decayed eyes. However, this effect could also be simply a result of neurons becoming less specialized with age in terms of their receptive fields. This adaptation suggests that ageing is an active process involving neurplasticity.

Computer networking is a prime source of mental models describing social organization, cooperation, collaboration, competition, and so on. This is due to the fact that it is driven by human incentives like trust and privacy, yet it operates mostly on a purely abstract and programmatic level, which enables creativity in exploring various social models. WPA handshakes, firewalls, demilitarized zones, all provide idealized mental models of social design. This might also mean that computer networking can inform social dreaming and vice versa.

Taking a third-person view on your reasoning helps you see flaws easier. Conversational interfaces around one's knowledge base force allocentric perspective-taking by design, helping one reduce bias. However, egocentric projection also has its advantages.

Genetics can be seen as an evolution of evolution, in that it's a mechanism for persisting "solutions" to difficult evolutionary "problems" across generations so that new generations don't have to constantly reinvent the wheel of thriving in an ecology. However, junk DNA has been observed to also carry meaningless information, challenging this hard adaptationist take. Kurzweil likens the scientific body of knowledge as a genome of technology, supporting incremental development from generation to generation.

The growth and popularity of sketchnoting, a practice of making abstract concepts more tangible through depictions, rather than descriptions, strongly signals the existence latent visual reasoning capabilities. This other form of knowledge can be amplified in knowledge work.

The manifold hypothesis connects the apparently complex nature of a high-dimensional space to a simplified low-dimensional manifold. While the manifold hypothesis has been considered in the domain of representations internalized by neural networks, it could plausibly provide a conceptual framework for linking the attributes of a system with its emergent properties. Therefore, the manifold hypothesis could be used as a conceptual tool for studying emergence in general, and particularly in neuroscience.

Reaching plans seem coded in eye coordinates because they appear relative to the eye fixation position. Remapping consists of changing object location representation based on changed eye attending location. In the intervening saccade task, the monkey has to move her eyes while keeping track of the target location. Neurons whose receptive fields cover the target after the intervening sacade start firing for remapping. By probing neurons involved in movement intention we can predict future movements before they occur and use this in building brain-computer interfaces.

If you wanted to get a new suit, you might order a custom suit tailored to your specific body size, dimensions, etc. However, this is costly, and another possibility would be to simply go out and chose an existing models among a few. Adaptationism argues that individuals evolve to get an optimal fit on their environment, just like the custom suit approach. However, selectionism argues that individuals evolve by making "smart" choices, essentially choosing what works for them more losely, or "satisficing".

Contrastive learning is essentially machine learning based on strategically sampling counterexamples for a given concept. Similarly, some sociologists argue that criminality and deviant behavior is essential for a well-functioning society because it provides "counterexamples" to the norm. Essentially, deviants successfully inform the social norm space, perhaps better than actual explicit norms. Their expressiveness is essential, as without them society would lose a sense of definition, there would be a collapse, like in machine learning.

Increased cognitive load, after elasticity has been exhausted, translates to lower levels of distractibility. The load theory of attention argues that when load is high, then perceptual resources is used at an increased capacity, meaning that no spare resources are left for processing distractors.

In the brain-stadium metaphor, neural activity is associated with the vivid activity which happens inside a stadium during a sport event. Each individual supporter from the audience represents a neuron firing. According to this mapping, EEG corresponds to recording sound from outside the stadium, trying to reconstruct individual supporter activity. Additionally, single unit recording corresponds to having microphones down the throats of individual supporters.

Agitation and stress are closely linked to autonomic arousal, an innate drive for taking action. Therefore, if used wisely, stress can be an important psychological resource which propels you towards difficult goals. However, it's important to choose self-regulatory and self-induced sources of stress which are pressing, yet tactful, such as deadlines or public commitments.

Both spiders and chickens, across other animals, have different photoreceptor configurations across different eyes. They essentially split bottom-up processing at a very early level, having different eyes specialized in extracting various features.

When considering a space with an extremely high number of dimensions, it might suffice to selectively sample from a subset of dimensions for defining an expressive manifold. The resulting dimensionality of the manifold be lower than the one of selective sampling. An instance of this might render neural interfaces feasible, where reading from a subset of critical neurons might bring advanced imaging into our technological reach, as argued by Greg Egan in his short story titled "Learning To Be Me".

One intuitively conceives creativity as the process of creation. However, creativity can also be seen as the process of intuitively ignoring the multitude of possible ways to go, and wisely choosing one path forward. The painter eventually painted one painting, not a billion other possible ones. The sculptor carved the block of stone in this particular way, not in one of the alternative myriad of ways. Creativity is fundamentally a search process, a foraging process. This is especially clear in machine-based creativity.

In guided search, people make use of pre-attentive low-level features in their search for a more complex item. Essentially, guidance based on a somewhat parallel pre-attentive search provides a preliminary filtering mechanism. Similarly, in semantic search and other machine learning tasks, progressively more complex models are employed to sequentially tread through the items involved.

Many people use a buffer for developing a second brain in the form of a light-weight setup for taking transient notes. Later, one makes the effort of synthetizing more durable entries based on those notes. In a fascinating (yet grossly superficial) perspective, the buffer for fleeting notes can be seen as the hypocampus of the second brain, the locus of a short-term memory system.

Both artificial and biological neurons appear to develop receptive fields which span multiple modalities if initially exposed to multi-modal data. In such contexts, it doesn't seem like neurons specialize in responding to individual modalities, likely due to the mutually-informing dimensions of the data itself. This further suggests that cognitive processes are not conducted in isolation, but in a deep interconnected fashion from which an abstract conceptual understanding emerges.

In the motor "homonculus", the size of the regions associated with various body parts is not proportional to the physical size of those body parts. Instead, the motor cortex seems to perform cognitive magnification for function, instead of structure. However, this might be useful. This premotor orientation supports the action-oriented enactive view of cognition.

9/11 was caused by lax controls in freedom of movement for people. Consonant with Herbert Schiller's critique of freedom of information, a memetic equivalent of the 9/11 might occur in the future, due to the lax norms of information hygiene. Malicious  memes can easily propagate in the global information society. This could be an unfortunate side-effect of capability development in the space of memetic psychotherapy. This hypothetical event closely resembles the "Meltdown" from one of Greg Egan's short stories.

Protein folding is often characterized by the incredible computational complexity underlying the physical process. From a set of initial conditions, it is extremely difficult to compute the resulting spatial structure of the final protein. In protein folding, the totality of attractions and rejections between each node and each other node guide the physical process in a highly non-linear way. In the neural manifold view, one can view the family of mechanisms which support Hebbian plasticity as the guiding dynamics of a cognitive manifold taking shape in neural space.

Free learning communities are based on validation through creation. Individuals are forced to generate creative output in order to obtain credibility, validation, and financial support. However, creative output which is educational in nature can be piped back into the free learning community as educational content, essentially closing the loop. There is great value in distilling material and creating great educational resources, and an appropriate culture around this might render free learning communities self-sustainable. However, indefinitely perpetuating perspectives might lead to accumulation of ideological debt.

In his short story titled Axiomatic, Greg Egan introduces the notion of axiomatic implants. Axiomatic implants are speculative devices capable of inoculating the user with certain beliefs. They target beliefs, and have a specific duration of activation. Given that beliefs are gates into the body's biochemistry, modulating beliefs through biochemistry and neurophysiology is decently plausible.

The brain-building metaphor is focused on the distinction between structure and function. According to this metaphor, brain structure corresponds to the building structure. Additionally, in a similar way a building structure supports various social functions (e.g. work, leisure, etc.), the brain structure supports various cognitive functions (e.g. hope, act, etc.). On a related note, it is the architecture which connects the structure and the function, both for the building and the brain. This idea gave rise to the notion of cognitive architectures.

In extremely painful situation, physically or psychologically, people often develop apathy, an effective numbing of their emotional response to the world. This defensive mechanism related to hedonic adaptation can be seen as an often needed protective shield.

Tense logic is a modal logic with four modal operators related to past and future defined in terms of accessibility relations. Time flow direction is based on which world accesses which other world. In tense logic, the accessibility relation stands for "earlier than", meaning that only past worlds can access future worlds.

If a patient internalizes a set of beliefs during memetic psychotherapy and then her actions are influenced by it, then is she completely responsible for her actions? Or is the therapist responsible for her actions? Or is the computational component involved in computer-aided rationalization? Additionally memetic psychotherapy may provide a painkiller for cognitive dissonance. Will this cause addiction? In this sense, memetic psychotherapy is morally ambiguous, yet insights from contemporary therapy might resolve this ambiguity.

Due to its high-fidelity resemblance of human cognitive architectures, the second brain architecture can guide the development of tools for cognitive augmentation. Through clear parallels with the human mind, it can provide a framework for dialogue between the two. Separate human cognitive functions can interact with specific aspects of the second brain, mutually supporting each other. The representational synchrony enabled by the close parallels also render the second brain more useful as a framework for transformative tools for thought, due to it being "on the same page" with its user.

Consonant with spatial metaphors used for latent space navigation, the semantically central items in a collection of discrete items are found closest to their "center" in latent space. This can be applied to sentences forextractive text summarization, concepts for identifying "core" concepts, or pictures for finding the representative ones. This is perfectly compatible with the perspective of concepts being based on prototypes, rather than exemplars.

Even if tools for thought appear to expand human capabilities, little to no attention is given to the possible externalities of using tools for thought in knowledge work. One of the most popular instances of this is the Google effect, which highlights the increased difficulty in committing facts to memory when access to search engines is frictionless. Does there appear a sense of dependence on such tools for thought? Are such tools enabling in some ways, but detrimental in others?

If we perceive the world around as and derive representations from it, as the cognitive realist might argue, and if we can imagine looking at the world from an arbitrary perspective, then why does our awareness default to first-person view? This is a dilemma explored by Greg Egan in "Seeing Through". Why is it that we don't have access to a vivid third-person view, based on the same (imperfect) representations?

After undergoing a shared first-person view experience, individuals might feel so closely connected to each other that they feel like being alone with themselves. They might long for otherness and mystery. As Greg Egan mentions in his exploration of first-person view sharing: "Nobody wants to spend eternity alone."

Automated fabrication refers to the technology which enables an individual to manufacture goods with little to no external intervention. Automated fabrication technologies such as 3D printing empower prosumers to go beyond consumption of goods.

Initially, when learning a skill, it is performed in a state of acute awareness. All details have to be carefully considered in working memory, with high error rates and response times. However, after a number of learning episodes, the skill transitions to the associative phase, where episodic memory is used for pattern matching, remembering answers with lower error rates and response times. After even more episodes, the skill becomes autonomous and reflex-like, stored procedurally rather than declaratively.

Cognitivism is considered to lead to two counterintuitive consequences in the experiential domain. First, it postulates that there are mechanisms of the mind which are inaccessible to conscious awareness. Not only are they said to be unconscious, but they're said to be impossible to bring into conscious awareness. Second, cognitivism postulates that the mind consists of fragmented modules, operating one with each other. In doing this, it challenges the experiential conviction of the unity of the self, and builds up a picture of the fragmented self. Those postulates of cognitivism could plausibly have experiential consequences for the researchers who internalize them.

Similar to how semantic embeddings can be used to study variations in meaning over time, they can also be used to study variations of meaning across space. Essentially, by using unsupervised learning to derive word meaning from different languages, one can quantify properties of various conceptual structures using latent space navigation. How close are "money" and "happiness" in various cultures? How strong is the "time is money" metaphor in different conceptual frameworks?

It has been observed that high-level cognition modulates pupil size. Particularly fascinating is the way in which visual imagery influences pupil size. Visualizing a (relatively) bright object or scene appears to actually lead to a physiological response in the eye, where the pupils constrict. Similarly, visualizing a dark scene nudges the pupils into dilating more.

In the concept-room metaphor, concept are associated with rooms in a family house. Exemplars are associated with physical objects stored in those rooms. In this metaphor, exemplars naturally "belong together" in a certain room. For instance, cooking utensils belong in the kichen and cleaning supplies belong in the bathroom.

Phenomenological transparency refers to the experience of a tool being part of your body. Drivers extend their situational awareness to that of their car. Phenomeneological transparency and the mechanisms which presumably support it might be the foundation of affordances. However, it seems to be proportional to the fluency of using tools. With a strong enactive and premotor attitude, one could envision a phenomenological theory of affordances which might integrate with James Gibson's model. The phenomenology of tools for thought and their affordances provides a particularly intriguing line of inquiry.

By assigning landmarks to one's body in a video stream, one can essentially create hooks and controls for manipulating visual representations. In a sense, pose detection, through the bodily control it enables, interfaces users with information on a kinesthetic level. This enables the easy creation of explanatory videos, by simply gesturing, an instinct itself associated with reasoning.

In a latent space, related concepts are geometrically close to each other. What's more, conceptual parallels show up as geometrical parallels. spatial reasoning. Based on this spatial metaphor of concepts, one can use the following primitives for navigating the latent space in a meaningful way, among others.
- Field: find concepts which are close to a given concept.
- Mix: find concepts which are close to the center of some given concepts.
- Span: find concepts located along the line between two given concepts.
- Shift: determine the directed difference in location between two given concepts.
- Match: find constellations of concepts which match the shape of a given constellation of concepts.

Considering that version control systems can be used to persist knowledge, it's easy to see how they can be used in the context of the second brain architecture. Besides simply recording past changes of evergreen notes, version control systems enable the creation snapshots of the user's past selves. Over time, snapshots can significantly diverge in ways of thinking and style of speech.

Just like a hammer can mediate one's interaction with a nail, up to the point that the hammer is perceived as if it's part of one's body, so can a tool for thought mediate one's interaction with knowledge. Tools for thought provide an interface for interacting with representations. Through the affordances they create, they might also lead to phenomenological transparency.

Just like people possess two kidneys, and can live even if one is damaged, so can a neural emulation provide a bodily redundance for the brain. This argument is explored at length in Greg Egan's short story "Learning To Be Me".

The visual cortex exhibits retinotopy, with different early areas being involved in processing different parts of the field of view, with larger ones devoted to the fovea. Despite this non-linear regularity, the world is perceived as coherent. The somatosensory cortex exhibits homoncular organization guided by function. The auditory cortex exhibits tonotopy, with different early areas being involved in processing different frequency bands, with larger areas devoted to more relevant bands (e.g. human speech). This systematic distortion driven by cognitive magnification might provide building blocks of conceptual non-linearity. The process of cognitive magnification might also highlight the various levels of computation required for processing different features.

It turns out that in machine learning, the task of abstractive summarization (i.e. writing a summary of a piece of content in your own words) is much more computationally involved than extractive summarization (i.e. extracting the central parts of a piece of content). This fact highlights the (beneficial) elaborative load of abstractive summarization. This supports the value of the Feynman technique.

Space agencies thoroughly disinfect the spacecraft in fear of not brining microbes over to extraterrestrial biomes with devastating consequences. This is likely do in response to the ignorant behavior of European explorers on American land who brought harmful microbes and disease, having devastating effect on the indigeneous population. However, the same is happening unwillingly with memes, as global communication platforms enable the selection of memes unbound by geographies. This diffusion of spatial bounds is made extremely vivid in one of Greg Egan's short stories.

Neural workspace theory argues that attention is based on a competitive process which involves multiple simultaneous stimuli and feature dimensions. It argues that firing synchrony is the main mechanism deciding the winners in this selection process pressured by relevance, together with various biases.

Our brains change from day to day. Sleep, experiences, learning, and many other processes influence our brains and arguably also minds. One might argue that a neural emulation which achieves an error rate below the natural baseline of deviation in human life is an sufficiently "accurate" one to be deployed. This is losely related to how self-driving cars are considered safe when they are at least as safe as human drivers. However, one could also very well argue that it's in this unpredictible error in which the human nature resides. This conflicts has been shortly explored in Greg Egan's short story, "Learning To Be Me".

Traditionally, when having to find a local optimum in a high-dimensional latent space, such as when editing a 3D model or an image, users would sequentially select from several alternatives (e.g. 2GC, 4GC), informing the search process. However, a continuous signal (e.g. through a slider) offers faster convergence of the search process and better results, even with the slight time overhead.

Just like memories can be reactivated and reconsolidated, so can the contents of the second brain. Each such iteration, each usage of entries in "edit mode", results in changes.

There is a sensible parallel to be made between momentum in stochastic optimization and retrospective futurism. In machine learning, some families of optimizers, including the popular Adam optimizer, incorporate a dynamic of momentum. Specifically, momentum guides the current direction of optimization using the recent history of movement on the loss surface. Similarly, retrospective futurism attempts to look back at the past developments of a trend in order to better forecast its future development.

Carbon shovinism argues that only carbon-based life forms, such as human, can possess real intelligence. This position argues that artificial general intelligence can never manifest. However, it could be countered through an appeal to inclusiveness. What's more, it can be countered by highlighting collaborative dialogues between humans and AI.

The Doctrine of Double Effect argues that causing harm as an intended side effect is more permissible than causing harm as a primary goal. This framework allows one to coherently accept self-driving cars occasionally resulting causing casualties, while simultaneously rejecting autonomous weapons designed specifically to kill. This perspective might support reasoning about the moral ambiguity of memetic psychotherapy.

Viktor Frankl argues that meaning is the primary motivating force for people. His approach to psychotherapy, termed logotherapy, consists on firmly reframing challenging situations in a way which highlights their meaning. Essentially, the goal is to elevate dormant meaning into awareness. Case studies in logotherapy can be seen as psychotherapeutic problems whose solutions consists of plausible beliefs and worldviews which make current events meaningful and worthwhile. In this, logotherapy can profoundly inform a computational form of memetic psychotherapy.

Soundness refers to whether all inferences proved by a proof system are actually valid. Completeness refers to whether all valid inferences are provable through a proof system.

Even in a movie theater, privacy is primarily concerned with the accessibility of information, rather than physical space. However, distance often correlates with limited rates of access to information. This is the reason why common focus enables privacy.

Family resemblance is the set of implicit dimensions which glue together the members of a representational family. Family resemblance stitches together fuzzy borders of fuzzy concepts. It creates gradients of membership in the latent space with continuous truth values. Originally applied to what brings together members of a family, family resemblance can elegantly extend beyond facial features.

Scenius is the term given to a small collective of ambitious individuals working in a cutting-edge field who somehow manage to come up with surprisingly many great ideas. The notion of scenius highlights the value of social structure in knowledge work and the value of diversity in problem solving.

How widespread a species is, specifically with respect to other species in its ecological niche, might be indicative of high fitness. A population which mastered its environment, through metabolic, reproductive, and security  lens, is likely to be abundant in a given ecological niche. However, this time-bound inference is lacking if one considers long-tail existential risks. Abundance should be taken into consideration together with perseverence.

If an ape participates in a clinical trial for producing vaccines, for both non-human primates and humans, and undergoes a lot of suffering in the process, would she be able to find meaning in her suffering? Possibly not. Viktor Frankl argues that similarly, people are sometimes unable to find meaning in their own suffering, meaning which might be self-evident for a creature evolved beyond the human.

Social media platforms have been criticized for their collection of data through face recognition of people who don't even hold accounts on these platforms. This malicious attempt against privacy was based on the data provided by actual users, which did have accoutns on the platforms. Similarly, when neuroimaging matures, it might become feasible to reconstruct aspects of an individual which hasn't been scanned from the knowledge and memories of individuals which have been scanned. This intriguing notion is explored in depth in Greg Egan's "A Kidnapping".

The semantic network model is a wide-spread view on the functional structure of long-term memory in cognitive psychology. It consists of a network of pieces of information which are connected through semantic links. What's more, retrieval time appears to correlate with graph traversal distance. In the context of the second brain architecture, the non-linear structure of interconnected notes resembles such a semantic network view of long-term memory. This parallel is similar to the short-term memory one and the working memory one. Over time, the second brain reflects one's long-term memory better and better, due to a marked increase in the overlap following patient note-taking.

If a species has been around for a long while, it's likely not only it is going to continue being around for a long while, but that it also possesses some sort of optimal fit on its environment. Assuming that it is ecological fitness that enables a species to survive through long-tail existential catastrophes, perseverence is a strong indicator of fitness. However, to get a more complete picture of fitness, one should take both the time-wise perseverence and space-wise abundance into account.

One might assume that their identity is only partly influenced by their unique experiences and circumstances, and that they do have a certain nature which abstracts away from the episodic. Additionally, one might recognize how they are more similar now to other individuals than to themselves from a decade earlier. Given the relaxed constraint of identity and the high uncertainty of one's psychology, one might buy into the idea that other people fuzzily like them might persist their identity in the future, after their bodily death. This is an ambitious rationalization of death.

With non-uniform priors, equality merely persists inequalities. However, equity attempts to mitigate inequalities even in the context of non-uniform priors.

The premotor theory of attention argues that covert attention is actually a motor plan being prepared. This action-oriented cognition is deeply compatible with the enactive view in cognitive science. The premotor theory of attention frames a high-level cognitive function in relation to a low-level motor coupling.

Logograms are symbols rich in meaning used predominantly in East Asian languages (e.g. Chinese, Japanese). They are self-contained discrete tokens which can take on many meanings, and are composable in surprising ways. In this, logograms resemble vector quantization in machine learning, in that they're self-contained, rich in information, and composable based on context.

The most frequent words denoting colors consistently encompass the entire perceptual color space across languages. The phonemes employed by the speakers of a language are consistently spread out over the entire articulatory space. This systematic diffusion might be caused by the increased value of symbolic discriminability and between-subject categorical consistency. Regularization constraints are often intentionally engineered into machine learning models, such as in variational autoencoders, in order to force representations to uniformly span the latent space.

Pupil size has traditionally been seen as a low-level reflex in response to light. However, it turns out that a wide range of high-level cognitive factors can modulate the changes in pupil size. Among those factors are cognitive load and visual imagery.

If you can't actually prove or disprove that another human individual is sentient, then why would it be possible to prove or disprove the sentience of a neural emulation. Specifically, if we take other human individuals as being sentient, why wouldn't we also consider emulations sentient if they don't necessarily provide less evidence. In time, this extends to recognizing the past as real.

If neural activity follows a manifold structure, and it's informed in large part by the environment, then the manifolds corresponding to higher-level cognitive functions should somehow be aligned with manifolds corresponding to lower-level functions. Furthermore, given Minsky's idea of predestined learning, one could infer that because the outside world is similar for individual humans, then their abstractive manifolds are also aligned by virtue of being aligned to the same object.

If one wants to design useful affordances for users through tools for thought, one has to be aware of the technological capabilities underlying those tools. Learning about machine learning helps tools for thought developers realize which functionalities are feasible and which aren't.

By using fluid search through a collection of previous notes, one can elevate into their awareness the most semantically related items in their second brain. This way, they are then easily able to optimally weave together new information with old information, in the spirit of constructivism.

Breathing can be used as a conscious control for influencing the body stress level. By performing deep breathing, one is maximizing the blood oxygen saturation while eliminating most of the carbon dioxide. The body reacts to this highly favorable situation by relaxing on a biochemical level. Conversely, one can hold their breath, and in doing so cause temporary hypoxia, a situation in which cells can't eliminate carbon dioxide and can't replenish their oxygen supply. This leads to an increase in stress on a biochemical level, and by extension to a state of high autonomic arousal.

In the context of the second brain architecture, fluid search output resembles the contents of working memory. Essentially, working memory is seen as a collection of pieces of information originating from long-term memory which are rendered active. The activation of items into working memory can be an effect of semantic relevance of information to the present context.

The prosumer paradigm highlights the possibility of every individual being both a consumer and a producer of goods and services. The prosumerism culture partially overlaps with the maker culture, and is enabled by automated fabrication.

Sociologists agree on the fact that public opinion is formed in time, not instantly in reaction to an event. For instance, a rough heuristic for when to start doing surveys is one week after an event. Similarly, there is also a suggested time point which marks a decrease in relevance, suggested at 3 weeks after the event as a guideline. Those oddly specific time points can be seen as specifying propagation dynamics of memes, perhaps being spawned in a memetic ecosystem and then being assimilated or rendered extinct.

The basilar membrane in the ear actively adapts sensitivity to certain frequency. The pupil actively changes in size in expectation to certain brightness levels. Gaze stabilization reflects dynamic attention. Adaptive physiology across modalities reflects top-down cognitive processes.

A simple way to force a machine learning model to derive a meaningful representation about the world it lives in is by tasking it to predict the short-term future. If a model successfully manages to predict how its environment unfolds in the future, then it plausibly learned a great deal about its inner workings. This can be seen as a self-supervised learning paradigm, together with recovery and matching. Additionally, attempting to predict one's behavior might lead to a meaningful representation of their behavior.

Sometimes, the presence of too many possible solutions is a problem in itself, because many of them have to be investigated. This is precisely why search algorithms are difficult to engineer: it's difficult to tell which solutions aren't promising from the start.

The self-model of consciousness argues that consciousness is simply a useful mental model for understanding our relation to the world. Supporters of this perspective, including Joscha Bach, Peter Watts, and Greg Egan, argue that free will is simply an afterthought of behavior, designed to infuse our worldview with coherence. This reduction of the self as a mental model is representative of the mechanistic and cognitivist school of thought in cognitive science. This perspective is likely to have experiential consequences for its proponents, especially regarding morality.

Because recent memories haven't had the time to get consolidated into long-term memory, they are volatile. This implies that they are more easily adjusted voluntarily. This is perfectly compatible with the brain-sled metaphor. In the case of traumatic events, actively reframing and rationalizing it soon after it took place might help avoid long-term compulsive traumas.

Discrete items, such as words or logograms, being embedded in a semantic space can be seen as individual checker pieces. The relative arrangement of those items is particularly important, and it's reflected in the configuration of the checker board containing the individual pieces. This embedding-checkers metaphor provides a tangible way of reasoning about how the meaning of items in a latent space is derived mainly through their relative arrangement.

Misogi are extremely difficult tasks one is undertaking. By systematically exposing oneself to harsh challenges, and sometimes managing to overcome them, one can expand their conception of what's possible. Essentially, Misogi is a tool for radically modifying the affordances of the world as perceived by an individual.

The brain can be likened to an ocean. On the surface of the ocean, there are waves which reflect the aggregate activity of the deeper ocean currents in some non-linear way. The waves correspond to the surface activity of the brain, in that they vaguely reflect the underlying neural activity. Moreover, the depths of the ocean can be linked to subcortical brain structures. Those structures are difficult to observe from the outside, and one needs to perform a deep dive in order to get meaningful readings. Moreover, EEG experiments are all about systematically dropping droplets into the ocean surface and studying how the dynamics change. Unfortunately, it's difficult to pick up the droplet-related signal from the chaotic noise of the waves.

The reduction view argues that the physical completely enables the chemical, which completely enables the biological, which completely enables the psychological, which completely enables the sociological. The downward view argues that the social level completely determines the psychological level, which propagates further below. The autonomy view argues that each level is independent, a separate conceptual bucket. The interaction view argues that all layers are closely interacting and mutually informing each other.

If one subscribes to the idea of neuroplasticity being embedded in the folding dynamics of a neural manifold, then the drive for elegant and simple explanations and models can be assimilated with a drive for dimensionality reduction. In a fervent attempt to collapse dimensions, find commonalities, and increase coherence, people seek the most elegant and simple explanations, because we're wired to do so on a neuroplasticity level. However, it might also be so that we simply internalized a belief which praises simplicity, so much so that it guides our science.

If a machine learning model has been trained to predict the short-term future of an environment, then the model can be used to generate training data for an agent-based reinforcement learning model. This way, predictive world models can essentially turn compute into data.

People tend to unquestioningly identify with a sense of self which they have to continuously protect and foster. In this view, external events, objects, and peers are seen through the lens of alignment with the self. Day-to-day things derive meaning from their relation to one's hopes, goals, fears, and so on. However, the sense of a unitary self appears at odds with the sense of transient experience.

In the West, freedom refers to the ability to do anything one desires. Interestingly enough, the Buddhist conception of freedom starkly contradicts the Western perspective because desires are seen as behaviorally-induced shackles in the context of the self. In the Buddhist view, freedom refers to the ability of being mindful of the ego and immune to the behavioral drives it spawns.

It's difficult to accurately compute the trajectory of a rigid object through a fluid. However, with enough examples of various rigid objects moving through the fluid, one can turn the task of physical simulation into a task of data-driven prediction. This has also been applied to texturing in 3D modeling. Data-driven modeling makes it possible to conduct automated fabrication which keeps track of physical constraints using only scarce computational resources.

In Cartesian and cognitive realism, the ideal of the mind is to be a mirror of nature. This coherence between the subject and the object would presumably lead to one being "in touch with reality". However, the apparent lack of direct access to the "outer world" leaves one only with their internal representations, as expressed in idealism. The actual ideal of mind as a mirror of nature leads to what can be described as Cartesian anxiety.

Bees see ultraviolet and plants are distinguishable in ultraviolet, which one came the first? Natural drift theory argues that entire ecologies evolve through a tight structural coupling, an intimate codetermination process, involving multiple entities at multiple levels of abstraction. Through satisficing in selectionism, various ragged evolutionary trajectories mutually inform each other in a recurrent fashion.

The brain-sled metaphor is conceptually similar to the brain-train metaphor. It associates thought patterns with paths a sled takes on a snowy hill. If a snow path has been followed repeatedly, it develops a form of attraction or magnetism, because of the snow trail which is differentially smooth. Similarly, thought patterns which have been followerd repeatedly are hard to break out of, because of the differentially luring trail in mental space. The abstract brain structure corresponds to the snowy hill itself and its trails.

The same brain regions appear to support both early perception and visual imagery. Visual imagery can interfere with early perception through priming effects.

NCC (neural correlates of consciousness) are brain regions which appear to modulate consciousness. In a 2AFC, neural activity is influenced by whether you notice the signal, not only based on the presence of the signal. The locations of NCC's make it seem that consciousness and attention share brain regions.

Just as a neuron involved in vision fires selectively in response to a certain kind of feature in a certain part of the visual field, a neuron involved in motor action also fires selectively when carrying out a certain movement towards a specific direction. A neuron involved in motor action can be said to have a motor field, just as a neuron involved in visual perception can be said to have a receptive field.

If you pipe a video through a machine learning model designed to detect objects, transcribe speech, or describe scenes, you can turn it into a format that's searchable. Using a trivial search process or semantic search, one could then search for specific things being said in the video, events that took place, or objects that were present.

In virtual and augmented reality, abstract concepts can be grounded in tangible objects. For instance, in programming, a code library can become an actual physical library, a game tree can be an actual tree, calling a function can involve a phone. What's more, virtual reality provides the necessary context for attempting to make any abstract concepts tangible, in an effort to infuse them with embodied knowledge, forcing a host of cognitive functions to be applied to the same concept.

When working together, people with widely different backgrounds are likely to generate ideas which no individual by themselves would have been able to. This might be causde by the fact that thinking, generating thought, on top of a wide range of only partially coherent belief systems enables thoughts to materialize which would have been incoherent which each individual belief system. That may be why rich repositories of mental models are valuable. Essentially, diverse beliefs and world views are a way of sidestepping ideological debt.

Traditionally, rigorous version control systems have been constrained to the domain of programming. However, eerily similar patterns exist in other fields. For instance, a platform where artists share sketches and templates enables creatives to build on each other work, all while providing credit and incentives by design. Version control systems might also help in collaborative knowledge work, although creating knowledge from scratch is particularly valuable.

Danaher argues that people have an innate social desire for retribution in the event of morally harmful actions. This is likely caused by our tendency to attach "agency" to otherwise inanimate objects and use them as objects of attribution. Additionally, punishment and blame is pervasive across cultures and proportional to wrongdoing and blameworthiness. This state of affair arguably makes the problem of autonomous robots frustrating, because there's no clear retributive response. Danaher captures this frustration in what he calls the retribution gap.

A painter shows you their view of the world, while an ophtalmologist helps you see the world with more clarity. Memetic psychotherapy should fundamentally be based on the person's current beliefs and situations. It should leverage context.

Concept learning might be described as the process of constructively scaffolding a relative conceptual structure. Initially, related concepts are elevated in working memory, similar to fluid search output. Then, the novel concept is sustained in a stasis, while the relations to the previous concepts are set in place. After a short while, structural changes start to reflect the internalization of the new concept, which is likely already located in the same neural space.

There are large text corpora available from various moments in history, especially since the middle of the 20th century. By using an unsupervised approach for deriving word meanings, one can investigate how word meanings change over time, with respect to each other. This is the main interest in historical lexical semantics. What metaphors did post-war France use to make sense of the world? What metaphors did post-soviet Eastern Europe use to see the world? By keyframing meanings across time, one might observe that meaning dynamics can be approximated with a trivial model, albeit in high-dimensional space.

If concepts are learned based on previous concepts, then how could you automatically rank concepts based on how essential or foundational they are? In the second brain architecture, this could be done using graph-theoretic approaches. With a less structured representation, centroids could be identified. For a more low-tech approach, one could simply track word frequency usage over time to infer somewhat of a concept tree, a timeline of sequential concepts used as building blocks.

Contrary to what adaptationism would predict, evolution is not a gradual change of traits in an optimization process, but is punctuated with sudden discontinuities. This is consonant with pleiotropy, in that it highlights the internal constraints of an organism guiding its own evolutionary trajectory. It's not trivial to move out of local optima in evolution, and it requires a coordinated and unlikely choreography of changes across multiple domains. However, those unlikely shifts correspond to the observed discontinuities in evolution.

Researchers often conduct double-blind trials in order to limit the influence of their own biases on the experimental results. By being unaware of which condition is test and which one is control, researchers have no ground for exploiting biases. Similarly, removing features such as gender, race, and ethnicity from a dataset provides one less opportunity for machine learning models to capitalize on bias.

It's easier to argue for enabling someone in a way in which they where previously able, but somehow got disabled. For instance, restoring sight to a person who lost their sight seems intuitive and morally unambiguous. However, extending the mind with an entirely new sense seems somewhat more ambiguous.

Backlinks are in-bound connections to a certain node in a graph. Besides highlighting associations between notes in non-linear note-taking, backlinks could provide a means of collaborative knowledge work. By picking up on interpersonal backlinks (i.e. backlinks caused by a person linking one of their notes to a note from a different person), one can encourage a dense network of collective knowledge, which could even be derived automatically. By introducing a node ranking method (e.g. PageRank), one could incentivize knowledge workers to produce the valuable content.

Gaining mechanistic understanding requires knowledge about causality. Science aims to distinguish genuine causes from spurious correlations. Hume argued that empiricism can't consider causation at all. Logic positivism argues that logic is the only source of knowledge, while empiricism argues that observation is the only one. As causality is not observable, empiricists were skeptical about causation. Correlation made the study of causation slightly more tangible, due to Galton. Correlation is problematic, as the causal relation might go either way, or some other way entirely. Causal structures explain correlation, and correlation can provide evidence for causation. The causal structure explains why changing the barometer reading can't prevent storms. Interventionism attempts to distinguish correlation from causation by systematic manipulations in experiments. The introduction of interventionism was termed the "Causal Revolution." Causal relationships can be represented with structural graphical models. Based on some rules, causal models can shed light on causal relationships. The Ladder of Causation goes as follows: association (related to correlation), intervention (related to systematic manipulation), and counterfactuals (related to falsifiability). Pearl argues that causal models are required in order to answer counterfactuals. He argues that AI is stuch on the first step of the ladder of causation, namely association. In science, deep learning appears to be good at pattern detection, yet not that good at formulating theories or causal models. Darwin's causal explanation of the origin of species is a significant example of causal models. Judea Pearl argues that we need to teach AI cause and effect. Advances in AI leads to many important philosophical questions.

In non-monotonic logics, conclusions don't have to be undeniable, compared to monotonic logics. They can be expressed as tentative and deafisible, meaning that it might be helpful to get to them, although they could later be invalidated.

The brain-piano metaphor highlights the nature of spiking neurons. By mapping an individual neuron to an individual key on the piano, one can then think of aggregate neural activity as a song played on the piano. Each key press corresponds to the spike of a specific neuron. Additionally, there's some rhythmicity to both the brain and the piano. Rhythmicity shows up in the brain as periodic waves and on the piano as rhythm signatures.

In his short story titled "Safe-deposit Box", Greg Egan portrays an individual undergoing a progressive decay of brain tissue. The story describes how his consciousness, in a resourceful attempt to persist, manages to unconsciously negotiate time spent in the bodies of other individuals. The "Safe-deposit Box" depicts an extreme case of phychological resilience through an individual whose consciousness jumps regularly from individual to individual around his body.

Given unlabeled data, one can create training samples from it by partially corrupting it and tasking a model with restoring it. This has recently been done in natural language processing with BERT. However, the same approach is present in denoising autoencoders for computer vision. Additionally, given unlabeled data, one can also create training samples by extracting meaningful pairs of snippets from one initial data point or two different ones, and minimizing a triplet loss. This matching procedure is present in the joint-embedding architecture with Siamese networks, like in face recognition. Those techniques have proven useful for developing models with commonsense knowledge.

Besides implying the existence of a physical self independent of an absolute ground, the interoception-exteroception distinction highlights the conflicting nature of perceiving the body and the environment. The saliency of one of them modulates the resources deployed to the other. The control of this "budget" is influenced by the quality of sleep.

The Edward argument talks about a scientist interested in locating the sense of hearing in a spider, who after removing its legs concludes that it's located in there. There seems to be a close connection between correlation/causation, necessity/sufficiency, and constraints. Reporting guidelines for participants may be a confounding variable in consciousness studies. Blindsight patients make it tricky to define the border between evidence for conscious and unconscious processing, like in forced choice guessing. Lamme argues that introspection is an unreliable indicator of consciousness. Asking for overt responses biases attention. Social alignment biases responses in 2AFC experiments. Attention modulates consciousness, but is an independent process. Attention is not required for visual awareness.

More often than not, machine learning models have a notion of how certain they are in their predictions, via various scores. That said, a recommendation system can be configured to be introverted, meaning that it won't speak up and assist them. Conversely, extroverted recommendation systems have a lower threshold for speaking up.

The Lindy effect is a heuristic for predicting the lifespan of a trend based on the elapsed time of that trained at the time of prediction. The Lindy effect feels especially powerful when comparing extremes like news articles and classic literature. However, if adopting a memetic lens, one might speculate that memes become pervasive and enduring because of a host of reasons which are imperfectly aligned with normative values. The memetic take on the Lindy effect might encourage doubting and reflection of the value of long-lived memes. In the extreme view, one might be strongly deterred from internalizing enduring memes, in fear of becoming bound to a local memetic optimum.

In modal logics, the meaning of a sentence does not only depend on the current world, but also on related related worlds. Modal logic proper introduces two modal operators: necessity and possibility. Kripke's key idea was that accessibility relations reflect relative possibility. Inductive truth definitions are very similar for modal logic proper compared to propositional logic if you only consider one world. Validity requires designated values for all models in all worlds at once.

People have been augmenting themselves for millennia, through writing, maps, language, and so on. Cognitive augmentation tools form a species of creative output which can be reapplied back to the creative process. Current tools for thought expand our capabilities of thought in ways never before possible. In light of this, it's reasonable to assume that cognitive enhancement is a path to transhuman singularity through exponential self-improvement of the human individual and collective, in collaboration with AI.

In the short story titled "A Kidnapping", Greg Egan explores the notion of intellectual property and copyright in a world where cognitive augmentation is a mature discipline. Participants invited to an exhibition are searched for neural implants so that they aren't able to record the perceived exhibits with high fidelity. This copyright concern highlights a possible conflict between intellectual property law and cognitive augmentation.

Temporal attention is analogous to spatial attention. Spatial cues can prime participants in attending to a certain location in space. Conversely, temporal cues can prime participants in attenting to stimuli occuring at certain moments in time. Rhythm is a temporal cue which guides the deployment of attentional resources at regular intervals. Expectation priming also influences attention deployment through increased sampling frequency and earlier onset. Spatial cue-like temporal cues also bias attention. Attentional blink refers to an attentional blindspot a little after initial deployment. Spatial and temporal attention are based on different brain regions and mechanism, even though they interact.

Mindfulness meditation can be seen as the exercise of recognizing intentions and desires derived from one's belief in the self. Buddhist practitioners argue that it is only by breaking the automatic chain of behavioral reaction induced by belief of self that one can become wise and free. This perspective is encoded in the Buddhist Wheel of Life, or samsara, which represents a continuous cycle which goes repeatedly from self to intention across a complex trajectory.

More often than not, a machine learning model can learn to solve a given task in an unexpected way. By definition, machine learning addresses problem for which people can't explicitly articulate a powerful solution themselves, so this is understandable. However, those perverse instantiations, as Bostrom calls them, can be deeply misaligned with the creator's interests. For instance, tasked with getting to a destination faster, a self-driving car successfully gets there with some police helicopters on its tail.

The brain-mind as hardware-software metaphor highlights the computational aspect of cognition. Similar to the brain-building metaphor, it highlights the relation between brain structure and function. However, this metaphor implies that cognition can be studied independently of the brain (i.e. just like software can be studied while abstracting away from hardware), which many scholars contest.

Several variations can be derived from modal logic proper by enforcing additional constraints, such as reflexivity, symmetry, transitivity, and extendability. In the associated tableau, the restrictions intuitively apply as inferences on the relations themselves.

Saccades often exhibit curvature. Consonant with the premotor theory of attention, modulating covert premotor attention influences the subsequent saccade trajectory. This saccade curvature can be induced through distractors. This finding is compatible with the model of attention itself as being based on a salience map. Eye movement would seek to navigate towards a salience optimum, while being nudged along the way.

When programming a robot or an object, people routinely take the perspective of what they're building. You have to call a function here, go left, make a decision. Virtual reality helps make this perspective-taking explicit, by moving the virtual camera.

In software development related to augmented reality, cloud anchors are textual identifiers for places in space. By using cloud anchors, developers can engineer AR apps which enable shared experiences with multiple users. Just like cloud anchors provide an identifier for a certain scene, place cells in the brain code for a certain place. The metaphor between cloud anchors and place cells bridges software engineering and cognitive neuroscience.

If a community of free learners or knowledge workers constantly produces creative output in the form of notes, then a conversational interface based on natural language processing can wrap around the entirety of their knowledge bases and expose a unifying gate into their knowledge. Besides making it easy for an outsider to tap into their collective knowledge, this unifying conversational interface might invoke a sense of cooperation between the knowledge workers, due to all of them contributing to a shared goal. Functionality of this unifying conversational interface might be supported by interpersonal backlinking.

Participants consistently make hand gestures when tasked with memorizing a spatial configuration. Artificially supressing hand gesturing leads to a decrease in performance. Those body movements performed during reasoning accurately reflect the representations being manipulated, especially their relative configuration. Surprisingly, blind people also gesture. This implies that body movement can be used and trained for supporting abstract reasoning.

In monotonic logics, more premises means more conclusions, or at least as many. Monotonic logics have no mechanisms for invalidating previously stated conclusions. However, real-world reasoning is punctuated with reasonable assumptions, which can then be challenged.

In his short story titled "Stable Orbits in the Space of Lies", Greg Egan draws a superb analogy between belief internalization and gravitational attractors. Essentially, he argues that each ideology, each mutually-reinforcing belief structure, each memeplex, is akin to a massive celestial object in space. Once ideologically close to a memeplex, it's difficult to rationalize your way out. What's more, memetic protectionism might be an attractor in its own right, due to the stable orbit which underlies it.

The brain-forest metaphor highlights the resilient and distributed nature of the brain. It associates individual neurons with individuals trees which form a forest. Cut down one tree, and the forest will heal and recover. Trees form networks linked by fungi in a similar way neurons are interconnected. Additionally, it's easy to miss the forest for the trees, and focus on replicating individual neurons as the key to creating truly intelligent artifacts, whereas modeling the aggregate dynamics of the forest might be a much more suitable level.

The sensory recruitment hypothesis argues that working memory is based on sustained activity in sensory areas. This theory posits that prefrontal regions are merely in charge of orchestrating working memory at a high level, while sensory areas are tasked with keeping representations active through various coding mechanisms. Drawing surfaces externalize such representations.

If you fine-tune a language model on a specific type of text, say for creating conversational agents which resemble one's style, it will inevitably decrease in performance on other texts. This might also apply to tools for thought and pleiotropy.

A larger oven helps the cook bake more cookies at the same time. Similarly, a GPU with more memory can house more samples at a time being processed.

Some argue that ambiguity promotes creativity. In an ambiguous representation, be it descriptive, depictive, or otherwise, people seem to "see" unusual things. Ambiguous stimuli might force perception into unusual inferences, in an effort to bring coherence to the scene. This view seems consonant with the idea of constraints fostering creativity, because the constraints are embedded in ambiguity.

Mary is a very knowledgeable scientist who lives in a black and white room. The "Mary the scientist" thought experiment asks whether Mary learns something new when she walks outside and experiences color for the first time. This thought experiment questions the relation between cognitive information processing and conscious qualia.

The mind-mind problem refers to the complex relationship between cognition and experience. Jackendoff describes cognition as the computational mind, and experience as the phenomenological mind. He highlights the fact that cognitive science has been progressing in its understanding of the computational mind and the way it relates to the body, yet it has only limited understanding of how the computational mind relates to the phenomenological mind, as is the case with qualia. Moreover, according to Jackendoff, the mind-body problem can be split in two. The computational mind-body problem addresses the mechanisms through which cognition emerges from the body, while the phenomenological mind-body problem addresses the means by which experience emerges from the body.

Consonant with the premotor theory of attention, triggering an eye saccade results in a covert movement of attention. This can be observed through increased discriminative ability for the region in the immediate vicinity of a subsequent saccade target.

A prospective reward associated with a stimuli can boost one's sensitivity to that stimuli. This can be achieved by artificially associating a class of stimuli with a reward and monitoring the deployment of attention to different stimuli. Through the substraction paradigm, neural correlates of reward expectation can be identified.

Younger individuals are often faster in their thought process and more accurate in their decisions compared to their older peers. However, this effect appears skewed by low-performers. Most established cognitive functions appear to decline over time, yet the few associated with accumulated knowledge unsurprisingly increase. Knowledge about cognitive function decline trajectories can inform suitable task choice for elderly to be effectively involved in. The digital symbol substitution task is a paradigm often used in the context of cognitive decline, and it resembles a copy-paste procedure based on a look-up table.

Many argue that non-linear notes should be densely linked. The dense linking constraints might force the learner to articulate explicit position cues in conceptual space, which might foster understanding. What's more, a densely linked structure also makes it easy for subsequent viewers to internalize the concept, similarly to how analogies or definitions would.

Both representationism in cognitive science and adaptationism in evolutionary biology argue that the individual is evolved for gaining an optimal fit on the environment. Representationism argues that the individual evolved to optimally "recover" physical properties of the environment, while adaptationism argues that it evolved to be optimally adapted to its ecology. However, both of these views seem to be limited, and arguments against them appear eerily analogous. There seems to be a tight mutually-informing loop between the individual environment, picked up as enaction in cognitive science and selectivism in evolutionary biology.

One can't talk about good chess moves. Chess moves, by their very nature, can only be good in the appropriate situation. The very notion of good chess moves captures the limitations of a strategies which doesn't take context into account when context is deeply informative, such as in neuroimaging.

Neuroscience sheds light on rhythms of neural activity and information processing in the brain. These findings are closely related to the timing of various events in the recurring cascade of sensation, perception, attention, and awareness. The rhythms of neural activity appear compatible with the meditative insights into the momentariness of experience, and may provide a neuroscientific basis for it. The momentariness of experience is related to the seemingly fleeting and transient clouds of sensations which form our conscious life.

Some ideologies often seem to be bound, even defined, in terms of their relationship to a certain space or time. For instance, continental philosophy, even if it consists of specific views on specific topics, is defined in terms of its close connection to European philosophers. Similarly, ancient philosophy or physics is defined in terms of the period in which it was pervasive. Memetic spacetime grounding makes it increasingly apparent that memes propagate between localized communities at specific times. Instant communication recently enabled global trends which largely lose their spatial bounds, but are still confined temporally.

The brain-in-edit-mode thought experiment goes as follows. You have access to a tool capable of perfectly imaging your brain. Additionally, it's also able to make any structural or functional changes you ask for. How do you now use this tool to help you learn a new concept or skill?

If agitation evolved to get us moving, and if moving stops agitation from building up, such as with optic flow, then engaging in a challenging task might decrease stress. The effort underlying the process might signal the body that the goal of the agitation build-up has been reached, and that there's no need for more.

Parallel distributed processing (PDP) models have been suggested as a solution to the flaws of centralized symbolic models. The von Neumann bottleneck refers to the extensive time complexity of algorithms forced through a sequential architecture. By attempting to parallelize cognition, PDP enables more efficient models, which often better reflect human performance. Additionally, due to its distributed nature, PDP is more resilient to accidents, malfunctions, or mutations.

To an unsupervised language model (or rather, a self-supervised one), human languages are as foreign as non-human languages. Therefore, unsupervised language models could potentially be used in helping people understand non-human languages, such as languages used by non-human animals or extraterrestrial civilizations.

Blind people can learn to perceive the visual world through a tactile sense, using a haptic feedback lattice. Many blind-from-birth people also report awareness of intricate spatial sturcture, derived presumably from sound and entire-body movement. Neurons with multimodal receptive fields might play an important role in this adaptation, presumably being exapted for cross-modal processing.

This metaphor describes the human brain as the combination of a monkey brain and a supercomputer. Subcortical structures are anatomically associated with a monkey brain, while the neocortex is associated with a supercomputer. The brain-monkey-supercomputer metaphor highlights the different "attitudes" typically associated with cortical and subcortical structures. Subcortical structures are stereotypically seen as primitive and savage, while the cortical structures are typically seen as sophisticated and elegant.

If one buys into the idea that concept learning is few-shot scaffolding, one might also argue that the mental models superimposed on new and previous knowledge are also essential to the process. Without additional structural guidance (e.g. by using plain fluid search), the learner has to derive the relevant conceptual structure by themselves. This additional step could potentially be augmented as well, through explicit position cues for placing concepts in semantic space. For instance, parallels might be called forth based on reliably internalized knowledge in an effort to better accomodate new concepts (e.g. when learning what a neuron is, a system could summon an analogy along the lines of "the forest is to the tree as the brain is to the neuron"). Essentially this would lead to a constructive pattern matching tool for mental models. As many other tools for thought, it might have unintended consequences.

If the genome of an individual itself places a complex constraint on the evolutionary process, then considering evolution as simply a matter of gaining an optimal fit on an ecological niche is only a limited view. Pleiotropy highlights the complex interactions between an existing genome and the selective pressure it undergoes.

Dynamic attention helps us perceive objects as continuous across time despite their movements. Through indexing and target tracking, it exploits low-level features in order to infuse percepts with coherence, facilitating high-level processing. This is similar to how gaze stabilization and pupil reflexes reduce stimuli dimensionality early on. Target tracking in dynamic attention is similar to optic flow in computer vision. The limited sampling frequency of dynamic attention allows for the aliasing phenomenon.

Barbara Tversky argues that spatial reasoning and the relative representations of physical objects in physical space is the foundation of conceptual thought. But, if the physical space is coded in three dimensions, how can it provide the richness and expressivity for housing concepts? Word embeddings typically span hundreds of dimensions. Perhaps the non-linear distortions associated with perception and motor action are used as high-dimensional building blocks in the constrained space of three dimensions.

The brain doesn't work with words or images directly, but with neurons. This makes it reasonable to assume that descriptive and depictive representations often share neural substrates. Systematic association across the lexical and visual domain further support this claim.

One mechanism through which selective attention is suggested to facilitate perception is signal enhancement. In signal enhancement, attention presumably amplifies the intensity of relevant stimuli, making them appear more bright or loud. Besides subjective reporting, signal enhancement induced by selective attention can be observed in event-related potentials varying in amplitude.

Traditionally, cognitive magnification refers to more brain tissue being allocated to the processing of important aspects of stimuli. However, this magnification can also take place across time. Through a change in the attentional "sampling rate", dynamic attention can induce distortions of subjective time as more information is being processed, similar to how motor action distorts space perception. Attention-induced time distortions are conceptually similar to periods of overclocking on a CPU.

Place electrodes designed for picking up muscle activity around the articulatory organs, near the neck and the mouth, and record activity while the person is conducting subvocalization. Next, you can train a machine learning model to recognize speech from the weak muscle activity associated with covert speech. Electromyography can enable an intimate channel of interaction with a virtual assistant.

Traditionally, videos are rather opaque black boxes of content which require one to tediously skim through in order to search for a piece of information. Techniques for making videos more transparent and easier to navigate include transcript generation, but also extend to mixed media. A static web page, for instance, can house snippets of a video in a format that is easy to parse at a glance. In a sense, mixed media is a video being embedded in its own table of contents.

Associating an exemplar with a certain conceptual family for which you also possess a prototype enables you to assume a wide range of properties for the exemplar by default. This might happen by projecting a representation of the prototype onto the exemplar. Prototypical reasoning is the basis of default logic.

In masked language modeling, a machine learning model is tasked with identifying tokens which are likely to be located at masked locations in a text. This task forces models to learn context-dependent representations of words, which result in powerful sense disambiguation. In other words, those models systematically use neighboring words as hints as to what the original word stands for. In isolation, a word can mean a lot of things. The context collapses words into a much tighter semantic distribution. A similar case of ambiguity in isolation can be found in neuroimaging. Multiple patterns of neural activity can generate the same observed patterns. This is due to the limited spatial and temporal resolution of current neuroimaging techniques. However, a masked modeling task may provide the right incentives for a model to derive a specific context-dependent representation of neural activity for use in downstream tasks.

If a person deeply internalizes the belief that great ideas and scientific breakthroughs are created only through the indifferent kinetics of memetic evolution, then that person may be discouraged from ambitious scientific and engineering inquiry. This situation is losely related to the tragedy of commons, as each person is relying on memetic evolution taking place in other hosts for bringing about innovation.

If concepts fit in neat separate buckets, then it's difficult to find parallels and recycle mental models. Essentially, categorical perception, beyond early perception, introduces a blindspot for nuance as detrimental as it's convenient. Not only does it translate to a blindspot for nuance, but also a blindspot for other taxonomies. Training oneself in relaxing categorical constraints through memetic psychotherapy might help.

In the context of speculative memetic psychotherapy, the very belief in the scientific plausibility of the methods might be a belief guiding the procedure. In this, memetic engineering resembles placebo medication, whose mere objective is to introduce beliefs, nudging the patient in a certain direction.

Assuming one's ideological mark-up can be viewed as a finite collection of interconnected beliefs, it is possible to make a parallel between the internalization of beliefs and the idea of debt. When internalizing a belief, one is "buying into it" based on coherence with prior beliefs. However, by "buying into" a plethora of mutually-compatible beliefs in a craving for explanatory power, one is essentially getting into debt. The ideological debt parallel highlights the fact that a mutually-reinforced belief structure is especially rigid and inflexible to perturbations. Accumulating ideological debt hurdles the explorative dimension of memetic foraging. This mindset narrowing resembles rigidity induced by arousal.

Interestingly enough, an important function of eye movement is not only to consciously direct gaze, but also to keep the visual scene projected on the retina stable. If the same visual scene would move across the retinal image, it would require advanced high-level perceptual processing. Essentially, gaze stabilization is like data preprocessing. This gaze stabilization is the base of the optokinetic nystagmus.

Metaphor can be seen as something much more central to thought than a colorful figure of speech in literature. Metaphorical thought helps us find parallels, not only among concepts, but even between concepts and sensorimotor modalities, as physical and conceptual space are coded in the same region. The concept of conceptual parallel is itself a metaphor (matching patterns of relation), as is metaphor itself ("carrying over", like a bridge). At the extreme, Hofstadter, Lakoff, and Johnson argue that metaphor based on embodiment is central to child development, abstract reasoning, and everything in between. In their view, cross-domain projection of invariant mental models is key to general intelligence.

Sociologists recognize the fact that in reaction to an important event, it is the extremist responses which surface first. This can be seen through a memetic lens as the most aggressive memes of an ecosystem reacting timely to the presence of a new entity. For less extremist memes, it might take a while for responses to be rationalized, the drift diffusion might be slower.

The creative output of knowledge work can often be fleeting, such as in informal brainstorms. However, archiving can be used to persist this knowledge for supporting future work. Among a community, for instance, a forum can help persist insights from a fleeting chat. For an individual, it's important to actualize the second brain buffer.

The debate between realism and idealism in the context of representations can seen as a chicken-egg problem. Who came first, the world or the image? Realism argues that the world informs representations, while idealism argues that representations inform our world. Enaction attempts to solve the world-image problem by arguing that the two are mutually-informing. Enaction argues that cognition is an emergent property of a tight sensorimotor loop which links perception with action. At the extreme, enaction suggests that perception is as much guided by action as premotor intentions as is action guided by perception.

Just like a similar physical environment predicts manifold alignment, so does similar cultural embedding. By being constantly exposed to similar metaphors, people naturally internalize similar conceptual structures, and in turn derive similar neural manifolds, by virtue of being aligned to the same thing.

If an AGI would be capable of mind-wandering through predefined "kinetics" of thought based on natural language processing, then it could also be engineered to be capable of interactively conversing with humans. Specifically, a query-reply compatibility might be enforced through a cross-encoder, forcing the thought process of a memetic intelligence to focus on the conversation.

Mindfulness meditation is more than immersing oneself in experience by attending to various objects. One can also derive value from it through a reflective dimension. Meditation enables one to gain insight into the nature of the mind through a close experiential connection. There have been some objections to self-reflection as a source of knowledge. First, some argue that meditation, as introspection, is unreliable. However, meditators would argue that introspection is thinking about thoughts, while meditation is experiencing thoughts in a state of acute awareness. Second, some argue that the process of attending to experience can change the experience itself. However, meditators argue that mindfulness is simply the process of challenging mindlessness, and it doesn't attempt to manipulate the intentional contents of the mind, merely to observe them.

If you use the many small decisions made by a crowd to inform a search process through a latent space, you can approximate convex optimization. Optimizer-specific dynamics such as momentum can also be integrated to determine user prompts for optimal convergence. In the case of a creative task, this is consonant with the view of creativity as search.

The neural systems which regulate reward are internal to one's body. There is usually no external injection of dopamine involved in the process of rewarding a behavior. The entire neural apparatus involved in differentially rewarding behaviors is intimately tied to one's own thought process and belief system. Even if some aspects seem to be innately selected for (e.g. food, sex, community), it seems like nurture can significantly modulate the reward system, essentially redefining the optimization function of the individual. As opposed to most machine learning models, the optimization function of biological individuals seems fundamentally malleable.

Despite often co-occuring in human law, responsibility can be disentangled into causal responsibility, moral responsibility, and liability. Causal responsibility refers to the causal link between an agent and the consequences of its actions. Moral responsibility refers to the agent's "blameability". Liability refers to the obligation to compensate damage. In the context of autonomous robots, causal responsibility is straightforward, but moral responsibility and liability are not.

Information about the physical space, mostly related to the immediate surroundings of the individual, but also related to imagery, appears coded in the same brain regions as concepts. This overlap of the neural substrates of spatial reasoning and conceptual thinking hints at the metaphorical projections which might provide the foundations of conceptual thought.

First-order logic introduces individuals (through constants) with attributes (through predicates) to modal logic. First-order modal logic can be split between the ones with constant domain (same individuals across worlds) and the ones with variable domain (different individuals across worlds).

In Western culture, design typically refers to graphics. In contrast, design thinking generalizes the methodologies of design to a host of other domains, such as experiences, processes, or organizations.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XAU7wzJCrZc
regulating user affect for patostasis?
people more comfortable with information with artificial agents, but also rapport, automatic contingent empathetic feedback
appraisal theory signals coherence, reward/not systems, argues emotion based on world-image interaction
reverse appraisal theory is neurophysiological/behavioral memetic probing!!
preference elicitation prob related to optimally infering one's intentions? might be interesting for cognitive memetic probing
Social related neural activity as turing test alternative
Relations might be coded, instead of concepts?
Fear also metabolism, neural dynamics
Neural activity precedes hormones, fear is coded before the stress response
Somatic marker hypo breaks the reason-emotion dichotomy
Neural emulation based on forecasting, deriving meaningful representations

Data augmentation seeks to derive more training samples from data. In contrast, the latent-variable architecture is based on fuzzily influencing hidden states in the latent space during prediction with actual input in order to stochastically generate output alternatives. Those output alternatives can provide a framework for expressing uncertainty in contrastive learning. As opposed to GAN's, the latent-variable architecture uses input from a dataset. This is analogous to how dreaming enables a form of data augmentation.

When various pricing plans are introduced for a product or service, more often than not is not to get customers to go for the most expensive ones, but rather to make them more inclined to go with the middle ones. The relative cost contrast makes the middle options appear better options, in comparison. A similar perception modulation based on contrasting instances takes place in robotics. Additionally, introducing personal tasks with varying levels of difficulty might make it more attractive for the individual to engage in more challenging tasks than usual, due to their relative ease in comparison to the most challenging ones.

Developing meaningful behaviors based on external rewards alone, as opposed to a self-regulating reward mechanism, is not sustainable. Take away the external reward, be it gold stars or social appraisal, and the behavior unsurpisingly stops being rewarding, even more so due to the sharp decline in perceived reward. Learning to modulate the internal reward system (e.g. through breathwork or optic flow) is counterintuitively effective in this regard.

Stitching together foveal glances makes use of transsaccadic memory. However, the process of connecting sequential gazes operates on a highly conceptual level. Switching lower caps to upper caps in text exactly during saccades goes unnoticed.

The age distributions of researchers making breakthroughs varies from one research field to another. Considering the fact that cognitive functions change differentially with age, one can infer a profile of the cognitive demands involved in a certain research field. For instance, a field with older top researchers may indicate a high demand on accumulated world knowledge and possibly a low demand on working memory.

Ubiquitous computing (ubicomp) is the paradigm of computing devices being seamlessly integrated into miscellaneous objects, buildings, and appliances which enable frictionless interaction with software. Surprisingly, ubicomp can be seen as the opposite of VR: instead of making the technology the focus of attention, ubicomp is about not getting in the way at all. Ubiquitous computing might form the basis of a new perception of the world, one of compute being embedded into the very fabric of reality.

On touchscreens, typing by swiping means that typing becomes more kinesthetic. Words become strokes with a certain visual identity, requiring a certain careful movement.

Metabolism influences neural dynamics. During sleep, the body operates on an arguably different metabolism compared to waking. Therefore, neural dynamics are different during sleep. Dreaming may be an evolutionary response to this opportunity of harnessing otherwise unavailable neural dynamics in problem solving and decision making.

Assuming cognition is the result of a tight sensorimotor loop between the percepts and actions of an individual, evolution suggests that the loop still provides an optimal grip on the world through adaptation to ecology. In this way, Darwinism casts enaction in a light of sophisticated realism. However, enaction responds that the plethora of observed adaptations (e.g. various numbers of photoreceptor types), indicates a disconnect between world and images.

Apply defaults in a row, and you get a sequence. When you apply defaults, the in-sets refer to what beliefs you're taking as true in the process. The out-sets refer to what beliefs you can't now be taking as true, given some assumptions you've made. In default logic, processes refer to sequences which are coherent in terms of their in-sets and out-sets.

In default logic, an extension is the result of properly applying a series of defaults. Extensions are defined as coherent sets of beliefs about the world, generated through default reasoning. However, real world models appear much more complex than the expressivity of default logic allows.

High-dimensional space provides increased expressivity for points through complex relationships, more so than simply considering a list of linear axes. However, the manifold hypothesis claims that the high-dimensional space is rarely populated in its entirety, and only houses points across a manifold. This double constraint can be expressed as the fact that the whole is more than the sum of its parts, but less than the (Cartesian) product.

Lamme's model of consciousness and attention suggests that sensory information first enters consciousness and only then enters awareness. In Lamme's view, sensory information which only makes it into consciousness spawns fleeting and transient representations which can be solidified through attention. Lamme argues that the role of attention is to select transient representations formed in consciousness for making them more solid and robust, possibly transferring them to working memory afterwards. On a neuroscientific level, Lamme argues that quirks of the brain, engrained through both nature and nurture, manage to nudge sensory processing into favoring certain contents. The feed-forward sweep (FFS) of information through brain pathways doesn't appear to correlate with awareness, yet the later recurrent processing (RP) does. Through competition, sensory information with the highest relevance to current plans, goals, or actions is eventually selected in executive or mnemonic areas.

A mobile optical apparatus enables an organism to apply high acuity sensing to the whole visual scene in record time. For smaller animals, this happens through head movements, while for larger animals, it happens through actual eye movements.

The binding problem can be subdivided into several subproblems:
1. Feature binding: How are features of stimuli combined into coherent representations of objects? Perhaps through biased receptive fields.
2. Subjective unity of perception: How are percepts integrated into a coherent experience? Perhaps through short-term feature memory.
3. Variable binding: How are roles associated with entities? Perhaps through firing synchrony. Nengo models this as convolutions between semantic pointers.
4. General coordination: How are abstract latent representations combined coherently with current relevance?

Remote control mechanisms can reshape one's affordances of space. Besides enabling a phenomenological transparency which transcends conventional spatial reasoning, it also reduces friction in performing certain actions, which might result in unintended externalities.

Considering the fact that humans seek a coherent belief system, a second brain might be an empowering tool, as it helps users relax that constraint. The second brain can seamlessly house conflicting perspectives.

In the case when two free learners create two different notes on the very same topic, a minuscule semantic distance might signal a conceptual gateway between them. Rather than being a case of two different notes building on each other, the two notes almost perfectly overlap. However, summarization forces understanding for both learners, which makes it almost advisable for a community to have multiple notes on the very same concept, written by different individuals.

The Bitter Lesson argues that, based on empirical observations of the field, machine learning should focus on developing meta-level learning strategies, based on which the model would derive the rest, compared to engineering symbolic domain-specific knowledge into the system. In a similar manner, predestined learning helps people derive rich, but similar, worldviews.

When one is tasked with tediously consolidating fleeting notes into robust notes, the consumption-creation ratio becomes particularly salient. By adding friction to consumption (i.e. by forcing this elaboration contraint), the free learner is nudged towards creation, rather than mindless consumption.

In machine learning, semantic embeddings of discrete items denote prototypes of conceptual families. However, those conceptual families are informed by exemplars. In this, machine learning tacitly embraces the concept theory assumption that concept learning consists on deriving prototypes based on exemplars in context.

Strong emotions experienced during an event often result in a more robust memory representation being consolidated. This is a prime example of how more "primitive" brain regions influence high-level cognition. However, how could this be exapted for concept learning or skill acquisition?

Just like similar embodiment and cultural embedding do, explicit words denoting mental states might also predict manifold alignment. Words like "stress", "joy", or "tired" evoke specific limbic states in relation to other concepts. This hints at the fact that speakers of a certain language think in slightly different, although internally consistent, ways.

Assuming that neuroplasticity is based on idiosyncratic dynamics modulated by metabolism, one might wonder how this could inform learning through neural interfaces. Could models forecast meaningful changes in knowledge based on neuroplasticity mechanics?

Speakers of a language have difficulty in recognizing phoneme variations in other languages which they don't natively make distinctions between. More generally, once you internalize a taxonomy, it's difficult to keep oneself open to other ways of slicing up a space into conceptual buckets.

In Javascript, promises are objects which denote a commitment to provide a different object at a future time. They provide certain mechanics for asynchronous processing with sequential dependencies. However, similar mechanics could also streamline interdependent knowledge work.

Just like breathing and optic flow can be exapted as psychosomatic tools, so too can peer pressure. Although arguably operating on a limbic, rather than autonomic, level, social structures might be engineered to yield impressive results.

Some cities were designed by prescribing certain social functions to certain neighborhoods. In contrast, other cities developed spontaneously, without focusing on localization of function, eventually developing a distributed network of neighborhoods. Similarly, the brain-city metaphor highlights how various neuroscientific perspectives use different cognitive architectures.

Although oversimplified and highly controversial, the triune brain model splits the human brain in three functionally distinct systems based on lose evolutionary criteria. The autonomic nervous system is related to primitive behaviors like breathing, and shows up from reptiles on. The limbic system is tasked with emotions and drives, and shows up from mammals on. The neocortex is tasked with high-level cognition, and only shows up in humans. However, all levels deeply interact with each other.

Minsky argues that that people have a mechanism for predestined learning, which drives us into developing similar conceptual frameworks. We might me conditioned to be conditioned in certain ways. We might be predisposed to a certain kind of perception. In this, predestined learning highlights a middle ground between nature and nurture extremes.

Localization of function consists of the idea that each cognitive function is associated with a certain brain region. In contrast, mass action consists of the idea that neuroplasticity makes it so that any brain region has the potential to support any cognitive function. Halfway between the two, PDP argues that cognitive functions are based on distributed networks of specialized regions. Those paradigms are made vivid in the brain-city metaphor.